README.md, before:

# chazel

Hazelcast bells and whistles under the Clojure belt

![](https://clojars.org/chazel/latest-version.svg)

- [show me](#show-me)
  - [Connecting as a Client](#connecting-as-a-client)
  - [Distributed Tasks](#distributed-tasks)
    - [Sending Runnables](#sending-runnables)
    - [Sending Callables](#sending-callables)
    - [Task Knobs](#task-knobs)
      - [Send to All](#send-to-all)
      - [Instance](#instance)
      - [Executor Service](#executor-service)
      - [All Together](#all-together)
  - [Event Listeners](#event-listeners)
  - [Serialization](#serialization)
- [License](#license)

## show me

```clojure
user=> (require '[chazel :refer :all])
nil
```

let's start a 3 node cluster

```clojure
user=> (cluster-of 3)
Mar 26, 2015 1:46:43 PM com.hazelcast.cluster.ClusterService
INFO: [10.36.124.50]:5701 [dev] [3.4.1]

Members [3] {
    Member [10.36.124.50]:5701 this
    Member [10.36.124.50]:5702
    Member [10.36.124.50]:5703
}
(#<HazelcastInstanceProxy HazelcastInstance{name='_hzInstance_1_dev', node=Address[10.36.124.50]:5701}> #<HazelcastInstanceProxy HazelcastInstance{name='_hzInstance_2_dev', node=Address[10.36.124.50]:5702}> #<HazelcastInstanceProxy HazelcastInstance{name='_hzInstance_3_dev', node=Address[10.36.124.50]:5703}>)
```

create a map (or multimap, or queue, etc):

```clojure
user=> (def appl (hz-map :appl))
#'user/appl

user=> (type appl)
com.hazelcast.map.impl.proxy.MapProxyImpl
```

use the map:

```clojure
user=> (put! appl :apple 42)

user=> appl
{:apple 42}
```

some other cool things:

```clojure
user=> (def goog (hz-map :goog))
#'user/goog

user=> (put! goog :goog 42)

user=> (find-all-maps (hz-instance))
({:appl 42} 
 {:goog 42})
```

### Connecting as a Client

```clojure
user=> (def c (client-instance {:group-password "dev-pass", 
                                :hosts ["127.0.0.1"], 
                                :retry-ms 5000, 
                                :retry-max 720000, 
                                :group-name "dev"}))
                                
INFO: connecting to:  {:group-password dev-pass, :hosts [127.0.0.1], :retry-ms 5000, :retry-max 720000, :group-name dev}

user=> c
#<HazelcastClientProxy com.hazelcast.client.impl.HazelcastClientInstanceImpl@42b215c8>
```

In case it could not connect, it would retry according to `:retry-ms` and `:retry-max` values:

```clojure
WARNING: Unable to get alive cluster connection, try in 5000 ms later, attempt 1 of 720000.
WARNING: Unable to get alive cluster connection, try in 5000 ms later, attempt 2 of 720000.
...
```

### Distributed Tasks

Sending work to be done remotely on the cluster is very useful, and Hazelcast has a [rich set of APIs](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/3.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/core/IExecutorService.html) to do so.

chazel does not implement all the APIs, but it does provide a quite KISS method of sending task to be executed remotely on the cluster:

```clojure
(task do-work)
```

done.

`task` here is chazels function, and `do-work` is your function.

A couple of gotchas:

* `do-work` must exist on both sending and doing work JVMs
* in case you'd like to pass a function with arguments use `partial`

```clojure
(task (partial do-work arg1 arg2 ..))
```

#### Sending Runnables

In example above `do-work` gets wrapped into a Runnable internal chazel [Task](https://github.com/tolitius/chazel/blob/6bfd0275239ea96a9240efb7abed6adaafd8ee6d/src/chazel/chazel.clj#L194)
and gets send to the cluster to execute.

say the function we are sending is:

```clojure
(defn do-work [& args]
  (println "printing remotely..." args)
  (str "doing work remotely with args: " args))
```

if we send it with `(task do-work)`, you'll see `printing remotely... nil` in the cluster logs of the member that picked up the task.
But you won't see `doing the work...` since it just executed this silently on that member.

#### Sending Callables

In case you do want to know when the task is done, or you'd like to own the result of the tasks, you can send a task that will return you a future back.
chazel calls this kind of task an `ftask`:

```clojure
chazel=> (ftask do-work)
#<ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture com.hazelcast.client.util.ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture@6148ce19>
```

a tasty future has come back, so we can deref it:

```clojure
chazel=> @(ftask do-work)
"doing work remotely with args: "
```

can also send it some args:

```clojure
chazel=> @(ftask (partial do-work 42 "forty two"))
"doing work remotely with args: (42 \"forty two\")"
```

#### Task Knobs

##### Send to All

A task that is sent with `task` of `ftask` by default will be picked up by any one member to run it.
Sometimes it is needed to send a task to be executed on all of the cluster members:

```clojure
chazel=> (ftask (partial do-work 42 "forty two") :members :all)
{#<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5702> #<ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture com.hazelcast.client.util.ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture@2ae5cde4>,
 #<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5701> #<ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture com.hazelcast.client.util.ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture@7db6db4>}
```

here we have a small local two node cluster, and what comes back is a {member future} map. Let's get all the results:

```clojure
chazel=> (def work (ftask (partial do-work 42 "forty two") :members :all))
#'chazel/work

chazel=> (into {} (for [[m f] work] [m @f]))
{#<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5702>
 "doing work remotely with args: (42 \"forty two\")",
 #<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5701>
 "doing work remotely with args: (42 \"forty two\")"}
```

##### Instance

By default chazel will look for a client instance, if it is active, it will use that, if not it will get a server instance instead.
But in case you'd like to use a concrete instance in order to send out tasks from you can:

```clojure
(task do-work :instance your-instance)
```

##### Executor Service

By default chazel will use a `"default"` executor service to submit all the tasks to.
But in case you'd like to pick a different one, you can:

```clojure
(task do-work :exec-svc-name "my-es")
```

##### All Together

All the options can be used with `task` and `ftask`:

```clojure
(task do-work :instance "my instance" :exec-svc-name "my-es")
```

```clojure
(ftask do-work :instance "my instance" :memebers :all :exec-svc-name "my-es")
```

### Event Listeners

Hazelcast has map entry listeners which can be attached to a map and listen on different operations namely:

* entry added
* entry removed
* entry updated

chazel has all 3 listeners available as wrapper functions and ready to roll:

* entry-added-listener
* entry-removed-listener
* entry-updated-listener

A chazel map entry listener would take a function and apply it every time the event takes place:

```clojure
chazel=> (def m (hz-map "appl"))
#'chazel/m

chazel=> (put! m 42 1)

chazel=> m
{42 1}
```

nothing fancy, usual map business. now let's add an update listener:

```clojure
chazel=> (def ul (entry-updated-listener (fn [k v ov] (println "updated: " {:k k :v v :ov ov}))))
#'chazel/ul
chazel=> (def id (add-entry-listener m ul))
#'chazel/id
chazel=> id
"927b9530-630c-4bbb-995f-9c74815d9ca9"
chazel=>
```

`ov` here is an `old value` that is being updated.

when the listener is added, hazelcast assigns a `uuid` to it. We'll use it a bit later. For now let's see how the listener works:

```clojure
chazel=> (put! m 42 2)
1
updated:  {:k 42, :v 2, :ov 1}
chazel=>

chazel=> (put! m 42 3)
updated:  {:k 42, :v 3, :ov 2}
2
```

now every time an entry gets updated a function we created above gets applied.

since we have listener id, we can use it to remove this listener from the map:

```clojure
chazel=> (remove-entry-listener m id)
true

chazel=> (put! m 42 4)
3
chazel=> m
{42 4}
```

all back to vanila, no listeners involved, map business.

### Serialization

Serialization is a big deal when hazelcast nodes are distributed, or when you connect to a remote hazelcast cluster. 
chazel solves this problem by delegating it to an optional serializer.

To start off, chazel has a [transit](https://github.com/cognitect/transit-clj) seriailzer ready to go:

```clojure
user=> (require '[chazel.serializer :refer [transit-in transit-out]])
user=> (def m (hz-map "amzn"))

user=> (put! m "bids" {:opening [429 431 430 429] :nbbo [428 430 429 427]} transit-out)
#<byte[] [B@5d9d8664>
user=>
```
notice `transit-out`, it is an optional function to `put!` that will be applied to the value before the hazelcast `.put` is called. In this case a value will be serialized with transit.

```clojure
user=> (cget m "bids")
#<byte[] [B@638b6eec>
```

a default chazel's `cget` will return the value the way hazelcast has it stored: as a byte array. Similarly to `put!`, `cget` also takes in an optional function that is applied after the value is fetched from hazelcast:

```clojure
user=> (cget m "bids" transit-in)
{:opening [429 431 430 429], :nbbo [428 430 429 427]}

user=> (type (cget m "bids" transit-in))
clojure.lang.PersistentArrayMap
```

In case you need to use a different serializer, you can either send a pull request updating [chazel.serializer](https://github.com/tolitius/chazel/blob/master/src/chazel/serializer.clj), or by specifying your own "secret" serialize function in `put!` and `cget`.

## License

Copyright © 2015 tolitius

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License either version 1.0 or (at
your option) any later version.

Commit message:

[docs]: listeners / distributed tasks cleanup

README.md, after:

# chazel

Hazelcast bells and whistles under the Clojure belt

![](https://clojars.org/chazel/latest-version.svg)

- [Show Me](#show-me)
  - [Connecting as a Client](#connecting-as-a-client)
  - [Distributed Tasks](#distributed-tasks)
    - [Sending Runnables](#sending-runnables)
    - [Sending Callables](#sending-callables)
    - [Task Knobs](#task-knobs)
      - [Send to All](#send-to-all)
      - [Instance](#instance)
      - [Executor Service](#executor-service)
      - [All Together](#all-together)
  - [Event Listeners](#event-listeners)
  - [Serialization](#serialization)
- [License](#license)

## Show Me

```clojure
user=> (require '[chazel :refer :all])
nil
```

let's start a 3 node cluster

```clojure
user=> (cluster-of 3)
Mar 26, 2015 1:46:43 PM com.hazelcast.cluster.ClusterService
INFO: [10.36.124.50]:5701 [dev] [3.4.1]

Members [3] {
    Member [10.36.124.50]:5701 this
    Member [10.36.124.50]:5702
    Member [10.36.124.50]:5703
}
(#<HazelcastInstanceProxy HazelcastInstance{name='_hzInstance_1_dev', node=Address[10.36.124.50]:5701}> #<HazelcastInstanceProxy HazelcastInstance{name='_hzInstance_2_dev', node=Address[10.36.124.50]:5702}> #<HazelcastInstanceProxy HazelcastInstance{name='_hzInstance_3_dev', node=Address[10.36.124.50]:5703}>)
```

create a map (or multimap, or queue, etc):

```clojure
user=> (def appl (hz-map :appl))
#'user/appl

user=> (type appl)
com.hazelcast.map.impl.proxy.MapProxyImpl
```

use the map:

```clojure
user=> (put! appl :apple 42)

user=> appl
{:apple 42}
```

some other cool things:

```clojure
user=> (def goog (hz-map :goog))
#'user/goog

user=> (put! goog :goog 42)

user=> (find-all-maps (hz-instance))
({:appl 42} 
 {:goog 42})
```

### Connecting as a Client

```clojure
user=> (def c (client-instance {:group-password "dev-pass", 
                                :hosts ["127.0.0.1"], 
                                :retry-ms 5000, 
                                :retry-max 720000, 
                                :group-name "dev"}))
                                
INFO: connecting to:  {:group-password dev-pass, :hosts [127.0.0.1], :retry-ms 5000, :retry-max 720000, :group-name dev}

user=> c
#<HazelcastClientProxy com.hazelcast.client.impl.HazelcastClientInstanceImpl@42b215c8>
```

In case it could not connect, it would retry according to `:retry-ms` and `:retry-max` values:

```clojure
WARNING: Unable to get alive cluster connection, try in 5000 ms later, attempt 1 of 720000.
WARNING: Unable to get alive cluster connection, try in 5000 ms later, attempt 2 of 720000.
...
```

### Distributed Tasks

Sending work to be done remotely on the cluster is very useful, and Hazelcast has a [rich set of APIs](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/3.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/core/IExecutorService.html) to do that.

chazel does not implement all the APIs, but it does provide a simple way of sending tasks to be executed remotely on the cluster:

```clojure
(task do-work)
```

done.

`task` here is a chazel's built-in function, and `do-work` is your function.

A couple of gotchas:

* `do-work` must exist on both: sending and "doing the work" JVMs
* in case you'd like to pass a function with arguments use `partial`

```clojure
(task (partial do-work arg1 arg2 ..))
```

#### Sending Runnables

In example above `do-work` gets wrapped into a Runnable internal chazel [Task](https://github.com/tolitius/chazel/blob/6bfd0275239ea96a9240efb7abed6adaafd8ee6d/src/chazel/chazel.clj#L194)
and gets send to the cluster to execute.

Say the function we are sending is:

```clojure
(defn do-work [& args]
  (println "printing remotely..." args)
  (str "doing work remotely with args: " args))
```

If we send it with `(task do-work)`, you'll see `printing remotely... nil` in logs of a cluster member that picked up this task.
But you won't see `doing the work...` since it was silently executed on that member.

#### Sending Callables

In case you do want to know when the task is done, or you'd like to own the result of the tasks, you can send a task that will return you a future back.
chazel calls this kind of task an `ftask`:

```clojure
chazel=> (ftask do-work)
#<ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture com.hazelcast.client.util.ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture@6148ce19>
```

In case of `ftask` chazel also wraps a function `do-work` into  [Task](https://github.com/tolitius/chazel/blob/6bfd0275239ea96a9240efb7abed6adaafd8ee6d/src/chazel/chazel.clj#L194), but now it cares of Task's Callable skills, hence we get a tasty future back. Let's deref it:

```clojure
chazel=> @(ftask do-work)
"doing work remotely with args: "
```

and send it some args:

```clojure
chazel=> @(ftask (partial do-work 42 "forty two"))
"doing work remotely with args: (42 \"forty two\")"
```

#### Task Knobs

##### Send to All

A task that is sent with `task` of `ftask` by default will be picked up by any one member to run it.
Sometimes it is needed to send a task to be executed on all of the cluster members:

```clojure
chazel=> (ftask (partial do-work 42 "forty two") :members :all)
{#<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5702> #<ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture com.hazelcast.client.util.ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture@2ae5cde4>,
 #<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5701> #<ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture com.hazelcast.client.util.ClientCancellableDelegatingFuture@7db6db4>}
```

here we have a small local two node cluster, and what comes back is a {member future} map. Let's get all the results:

```clojure
chazel=> (def work (ftask (partial do-work 42 "forty two") :members :all))
#'chazel/work

chazel=> (into {} (for [[m f] work] [m @f]))
{#<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5702>
 "doing work remotely with args: (42 \"forty two\")",
 #<MemberImpl Member [192.168.1.4]:5701>
 "doing work remotely with args: (42 \"forty two\")"}
```

##### Instance

By default chazel will look for a client instance, if it is active, it will use that, if not it will get a server instance instead.
But in case you'd like to use a concrete instance in order to send out tasks from you can:

```clojure
(task do-work :instance your-instance)
```

##### Executor Service

By default chazel will use a `"default"` executor service to submit all the tasks to.
But in case you'd like to pick a different one, you can:

```clojure
(task do-work :exec-svc-name "my-es")
```

##### All Together

All the options can be used with `task` and `ftask`:

```clojure
(task do-work :instance "my instance" :exec-svc-name "my-es")
```

```clojure
(ftask do-work :instance "my instance" :memebers :all :exec-svc-name "my-es")
```

### Event Listeners

Hazelcast has map entry listeners which can be attached to maps and listen on different operations, namely:

* entry added
* entry removed
* entry updated

chazel has all 3 listeners available as wrapper functions and ready to roll:

* entry-added-listener
* entry-removed-listener
* entry-updated-listener

A chazel map entry listener would take a function and apply it every time the event takes place:

```clojure
chazel=> (def m (hz-map "appl"))
#'chazel/m

chazel=> (put! m 42 1)

chazel=> m
{42 1}
```

nothing fancy, usual map business. now let's add an update listener:

```clojure
chazel=> (def ul (entry-updated-listener (fn [k v ov] (println "updated: " {:k k :v v :ov ov}))))
#'chazel/ul
chazel=> (def id (add-entry-listener m ul))
#'chazel/id
chazel=> id
"927b9530-630c-4bbb-995f-9c74815d9ca9"
chazel=>
```

`ov` here is an `old value` that is being updated.

When the listener is added, hazelcast assigns a `uuid` to it. We'll use it a bit later. For now let's see how the listener works:

```clojure
chazel=> (put! m 42 2)
1
updated:  {:k 42, :v 2, :ov 1}
chazel=>

chazel=> (put! m 42 3)
updated:  {:k 42, :v 3, :ov 2}
2
```

now every time an entry gets updated a function we created above gets applied.

Since we have listener id, we can use it to remove this listener from the map:

```clojure
chazel=> (remove-entry-listener m id)
true

chazel=> (put! m 42 4)
3
chazel=> m
{42 4}
```

all back to vanilla, no listeners involved, map business.

### Serialization

Serialization is a big deal when hazelcast nodes are distributed, or when you connect to a remote hazelcast cluster. 
chazel solves this problem by delegating it to an optional serializer.

To start off, chazel has a [transit](https://github.com/cognitect/transit-clj) seriailzer ready to go:

```clojure
user=> (require '[chazel.serializer :refer [transit-in transit-out]])
user=> (def m (hz-map "amzn"))

user=> (put! m "bids" {:opening [429 431 430 429] :nbbo [428 430 429 427]} transit-out)
#<byte[] [B@5d9d8664>
user=>
```
notice `transit-out`, it is an optional function to `put!` that will be applied to the value before the hazelcast `.put` is called. In this case a value will be serialized with transit.

```clojure
user=> (cget m "bids")
#<byte[] [B@638b6eec>
```

a default chazel's `cget` will return the value the way hazelcast has it stored: as a byte array. Similarly to `put!`, `cget` also takes in an optional function that is applied after the value is fetched from hazelcast:

```clojure
user=> (cget m "bids" transit-in)
{:opening [429 431 430 429], :nbbo [428 430 429 427]}

user=> (type (cget m "bids" transit-in))
clojure.lang.PersistentArrayMap
```

In case you need to use a different serializer, you can either send a pull request updating [chazel.serializer](https://github.com/tolitius/chazel/blob/master/src/chazel/serializer.clj), or by specifying your own "secret" serialize function in `put!` and `cget`.

## License

Copyright © 2015 tolitius

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License either version 1.0 or (at
your option) any later version.
